---
title: "A Taxi Driver (2017) (WIP)"
date: 2020-03-22T20:29:17+13:00
draft: false
tags: [ "film", "asian cinema" ]
---
This article contains spoilers!

Amid recent popularity of South Korean cinema in the west, such as the hugely successful Parasite by Bong Joon-ho (which is definitely worth the watch), I wanted to highlight a film much less known in the west - A Taxi Driver / 택시운전사 (2017). Directed by Jang Hoon and written by Eom Yu-na, the film contrary to its cheery poster depicts events in Gwangju, which took place over a week in May of 1980. A Taxi Driver is a brilliant film - intense, deeply moving, and does a great job of weaving several deeply interconnected personal experiences into one cohesive narrative. However, the topic of the film remains interesting in-of itself; for the historical event it depicts has a shockingly poor sense of awareness world-wide. I’m going to take a shot at explaining what’s going on in A Taxi Driver, to hopefully expand the experience for western viewers of this incredible film, and then discuss a little about the film itself and thoughts on it’s relevance today.

Having said this, I do think it’s completely valid, and perhaps, advised, to watch this film without a shred of understanding of the events - and that’s exactly what the two protagonists of the film are working with. I knew nothing about this event prior to watching this film, and it definitely deepened my experience in disbelief at what I was watching. You get a sense of what it must’ve been like to be Thomas Kretschmann’s character.

I would think Jang Hoon made this film with the understanding that a large amount of it’s intended audience would have cultural knowledge of this event, so feel free to keep reading to get a primer on that understanding. It’s up to you!

A Short Korean History 101

This is a bit of a whistle stop tour of Korean history from the end of WWII to the date A Taxi Driver is set, and it’s pretty quick - so strap in.

Following the end of World War II, Korea had a succession of military backed authoritarian presidents. This was established by South Korea’s first president Syngman Rhee, who was given the platform to take power by hidden support of the U.S.’s military’s chain of command, including Douglas MacArthur, on the basis of having an ‘inside man’ looking after South Korea - a significant benefit to the U.S. given the rising concerns around budding Communism in Asia at the time. 

Syngman Rhee presided over South Korea from 1948 through to 1960. Rhee, although not inherently evil, did little to improve South Korea’s economy or living conditions through his terms. Following an election where Rhee’s opposition died immediately preceding the election, Rhee achieved 100% of the vote by default. Incensed by this un-democratic injustice, the April Revolution took place after the discovery of a body of a student killed by police in protests against the election. The April Revolution (fueled by the election injustice and a long-standing dissent against autocratic rule) led to large protests, which forced the resignation and exile of Syngman Rhee to Hawaii. Following this, a short-lived ‘Second Republic’ was established, which was promptly military coup d'état’ed following the failure to make any significant change to the laggard economic situation under Syngman Rhee. This coup installed Park Chung-hee, who promptly started another authoritarian term from 1961 to 1979. Chung-hee was assassinated in October of ‘79, with a laundry list of potential motives which are still disputed today. His assassination created a power vaccum, which was capatlised on by Chun Doo-hwan, an army general who installed a puppet president Choi Kyu-hah. Doo-hwan then in turn arrested General Jeong Seung-hwa on allegations he was involved in the assasination of Chung-hee, and the resulting conflict ended with Doo-hwan seizing power and pushing his puppet aside in the closing days of ‘79.

What’s important to note here is that we have highly similar political conditions at this time as the end of Syngman Rhee’s reign, with the end of a long-term authoritarian regime and the apparent beginnings of the next. Due to the extended authoritarian control, dissent of this power structure existed around Korea particularly in university students more aware of global politics and democratic conditions elsewhere. Protests commenced in many spots around Korea expressing their desire for democratic leadership, and we have an ex-military General with the reins, trying to control the situation. Thus sets the stage for the plot of A Taxi Driver.

If you don’t want the rest of the film spoiled for you, go watch it now! You know enough for a pretty solid understanding of what’s about to happen and why. If you continue to read I assume you’ve either seen it or don’t mind spoilers.

A Taxi Driver depicts the events of the Gwangju Uprising (or what is probably more appropriately termed a massacre) through the eyes of a Seoul taxi driver, played by the ever incredible Song Kang-ho. Song’s character, Kim, is blissfully unaware of political ongoings in his country and views the protests in his home city of Seoul as ‘university students wasting time instead of studying’. Kim doesn’t question the political environment and justifies this through his experiences working in Saudi Arabia, which he views as a veritable hell compared to his life-style in Korea. As not everything is black and white, Korea experienced enormous economic development under the early years of Chung-hee, and it would be absolutely understandable to believe your situation is much better than elsewhere, especially for someone like Kim who likely gets little exposure to events and political conditions outside Korea. Aside Kim is Thomas Kretschmann’s character, Jürgen, who is a German reporter who has snuck into South Korea upon rumours of increasing conflict. He hopes to document events, and for his actions he becomes a hero of the students and democratic supporters - demonstrating the power of independent press political struggles.

Tragically, Kim’s illusion is shattered at the experience of the ROKA rapidly increasing their acts of violence to suppress the protestors in the city of Gwangju. This escalated to the point of outright firing live ammunition into crowds of protestors, killing potentially two thousand or more of mostly university students. This is shockingly extreme. No doubt enforced by Chung-hee, these events really happened. The official death toll stands at 170 as per the martial law command at the time, but this is clearly disputable. This abhorrent use of violent force to suppress democratic movements is sadly not uncommon. This event is strikingly similar to the events at Tiananmen Square, nine years later.

This is despite it arguably being as significant politically and in terms of harm to human life as the events of Tiananmen Square in 1989, an anniversary which we recall yearly in my experience.
